gūḍhaṃ vasudevagirā kartuṃ te niṣkriyasya saṃskārān |
hṛdgatahorātattvo gargamunistvat gṛhaṃ vibho gatavān ||1||
gūḍham	secretly (said)
vasudeva-girā	the words of Vasudeva (directed by that)
kartum te	to do (perform) Thy
niṣkriyasya	who are above all rites and rituals
saṃskārān	(Thy) sacraments
hṛd-gata-horā-tatva:	an expert in astrology
garga-muni:	Garga Muni
tvat-gṛham	to Thy house
vibho	O Lord!
gatavān	went
O All pervading Lord! Thou are above and beyond all ceremonies and rites. Yet, Garga Muni an expert at astronomy and astrology, went to Thy house at the secret request of Vasudeva, to perform sacraments for Thee.
nando'tha nanditātmā vṛndiṣṭaṃ mānayannamuṃ yaminām |
mandasmitārdramūce tvatsaṃskārān vidhātumutsukadhī: ||2||
nanda:-atha	Nanda, then
nandita-ātmā	delightfully
vṛndiṣṭam	the greatest of all
mānayan-amum	honouring, this (Garga Muni)
yaminām	(greatest) of all the sages
mand-smita-ārdram-ūce	with a gentle smile said (requested)
tvat-saṃskāran	sacraments for Thee
vidhātum-utsuka-dhī:	to perform (who) was eager
Nanda was very delighted and he honoured the greatest of all the sages Garga Muni, who was eager to perform the sacraments for Thee. He then, with a gentle smile requested the sage to perform the rites.
yaduvaṃśācāryatvāt sunibhṛtamidamārya kāryamiti kathayan |
gargo nirgatapulakaścakre tava sāgrajasya nāmāni ||3||
yaduvaṃśa-	of the Yadu clan
ācāryatvāt	being the priest
sunibhṛtam-idam-	very secretly this
ārya kāryam-iti	O Respected One (Nanda), should be done, thus
kathayan garga:	saying, sage Garga
nirgata-pulaka:-	with horripilation
cakre tava	performed, Thy with Thy elder brother's
sāgrajasya nāmāni	naming (ceremony)
Sage Garga said,'O Respected Nanda, since I am the priest of the Yadu clan, this ceremony must be performed in great secrecy'. Saying so, with horripilation over his body he performed the naming ceremony of Thee and Thy elder brother.
kathamasya nāma kurve sahasranāmno hyanantanāmno vā |
iti nūnaṃ gargamuniścakre tava nāma nāma rahasi vibho ||4||
katham-asya	how, for this (child)
nāma kurve	naming should I do
sahasra-nāmna: hi-	(who) having a thousand names indeed
ananta-nāmna: vā	or rather having endless names
iti nūnaṃ	thus surely (thinking)
garga-muni:-	Garga Muni
cakre tava nāma	performed Thy naming
nāma rahasi	in great secrecy
vibho	O Lord!
How should I do the naming of this child? He indeed has thousands of names or rather endless names. O Lord! May be that sage Garga thinking like this, performed Thy naming in great secrecy.
kṛṣidhātuṇakārābhyāṃ sattānandātmatāṃ kilābhilapat |
jagadaghakarṣitvaṃ vā kathayadṛṣi: kṛṣṇanāma te vyatanot ||5||
kṛṣi-dhātu-	Krish, the root (verb)
ṇa-kārābhyām	and with N suffix (by putting the two together)
sattā-ānanda-ātmatām	Existence Bliss (being Thy) real nature
kila-abhilapat	indeed denoting
jagat-agha-karṣitvaṃ vā	or of (the people of) the world, the sins, drawing away
kathayat-ṛṣi:	declaring, the sage
kṛṣṇa-nāma te	the name Krishna to Thee
vyatanot	gave
The putting together of the root of the verb Krish and the suffix N, denoting the combining of Existence and absolute Bliss, which is Thy real nature, declaring, the sage gave Thee the name Krishna. Also signifying the drawing away of the sins of the people of the world, the name Krishna was given to Thee.
anyāṃśca nāmabhedān vyākurvannagraje ca rāmādīn |
atimānuṣānubhāvaṃ nyagadattvāmaprakāśayan pitre ||6||
anyān-ca nāma-bhedān	and other different names
vyākurvan-	giving (like Vaasudeva)
agraje ca rāma-ādīn	and to Thy elder brother Raama etc (calling thus)
atimānuṣa-anubhāvaṃ	(of a) superhuman disposition
nyagadat-	told (indicated)
tvām-aprakāśayan	Thee not revealing
pitre	to (Thy) father
The sage also gave Thee other different names like Vaasudeva. Then he gave the name Raama etc to Thy elder brother. Having done so, Garg Muni indicated to Thy having superhuman powers and disposition, to Thy father. Yet he did not fully reveal Thy real identity as Lord Himself.
snihyati yastava putre muhyati sa na māyikai: puna: śokai: |
druhyati ya: sa tu naśyedityavadatte mahattvamṛṣivarya: ||7||
snihyati ya:-tava putre	whoever loves your son
muhyati sa na māyikai:	he will not be deluded by Maayaa
puna: śokai:	(and) again by sorrows
druhyati ya:	he who goes against him
sa tu naśyet-	he certainly will be destroyed
iti-avadat-	thus said
te mahattvam-	Thy glory
ṛṣivarya:	the great sage
Who so ever loves your son will not be deluded by Maayaa and so will not be overcome by sorrows thereafter. And who so ever assails him will certainly perish.' Thus the great sage described Thy glory and greatness.
jeṣyati bahutaradaityān neṣyati nijabandhulokamamalapadam |
śroṣyasi suvimalakīrtīrasyeti bhavadvibhūtimṛṣirūce ||8||
jeṣyati bahutara-daityān	will conquer many Asuras
neṣyati nijabandhu-lokam-	will take his own people
amala-padam	to the pure realm
śroṣyasi	will make you hear
suvimala-kīrtī:-asya-	very pure fame, his
iti bhavat-vibhūtim-	thus Thy greatness
ṛṣi:-ūce	the sage spoke
He will conquer many Asuras and will take his own people to the realms of purity. You will have occasions to hear of his untainted pure fame.' Thus the sage spoke of Thy greatness.
amunaiva sarvadurgaṃ taritāstha kṛtāsthamatra tiṣṭhadhvam |
harirevetyanabhilapannityādi tvāmavarṇayat sa muni: ||9||
amunā-eva	by him alone
sarva-durgam taritāstha	all obstacles (you) will cross
kṛta-āstham-atra	placing your faith here
tiṣṭhadhvam	remain
hari:-eva-iti-	Hari only is this
anabhilapan-	not saying
ityādi	in this manner
tvām-avarṇayat	Thee described
sa muni:	that sage
By his help alone you will be able to overcome all obstacles. Remain with your full faith placed in him.' Thus without saying that Thou were Hari, the sage thus described Thee.
garge'tha nirgate'smin nanditanandādinandyamānastvam |
madgadamudgatakaruṇo nirgamaya śrīmarutpurādhīśa ||10||
garge-atha	then Garg Muni
nirgate-asmin	having left, he,
nandita-nanda-ādi-	delighted Nanda and others
nandyamāna:-tvam	endeared Thou
mat-gadam-	my ailments
udgata-karuṇa:	(Thou) full of compassion
nirgamaya	remove
śrīmarutpurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Then Garga Muni went away. Nanda and the others were very delighted and looked after Thee endearingly. O Lord of Guruvaayur! who are full of compassion, remove my ailments.